sspmp/header.adoc, before:

[[header]]
:description: RISC-V S-mode Physical Memory Protection (Sspmp)
:company: RISC-V.org
:revdate: 7/2025
:revnumber: 0.9.12
:revremark: This document is in development. Assume everything can change. See http://riscv.org/spec-state for details.
:url-riscv: http://riscv.org
:doctype: book
:preface-title: Preamble
:colophon:
:appendix-caption: Appendix
:imagesdir: /inputs/images
:title-logo-image: image:risc-v_logo.svg[pdfwidth=3.25in,align=center]
// Settings:
:experimental:
:reproducible:
// needs to be changed? bug discussion started
//:WaveDromEditorApp: app/wavedrom-editor.app
:imagesoutdir: /outputs/images
:bibtex-file: example.bib
:bibtex-order: alphabetical
:bibtex-style: apa
:icons: font
:lang: en
:listing-caption: Listing
:sectnums:
:toc: left
:toclevels: 4
:source-highlighter: pygments
ifdef::backend-pdf[]
:source-highlighter: coderay
endif::[]
:data-uri:
:hide-uri-scheme:
:stem: latexmath
:footnote:
:xrefstyle: short

= RISC-V S-mode Physical Memory Protection (SPMP)
Editor - Dong Du, Bicheng Yang, RISC-V SPMP Task Group

// Preamble
[WARNING]
.This document is in the link:http://riscv.org/spec-state[Development state]
====
Assume everything can change. This draft specification will change before
being accepted as standard, so implementations made to this draft
specification will likely not conform to the future standard.
====

[preface]
== Copyright and license information
This specification is licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License (CC-BY 4.0). The full
license text is available at
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

Copyright 2023 by RISC-V International.

[preface]
include::contributors.adoc[]

include::intro.adoc[]
include::spmp_spec.adoc[]
include::Resource_Sharing.adoc[]
include::Summary_of_Hardware_Changes.adoc[]
include::guidelines.adoc[]
// include::Interaction_with_hypervisor_extension.adoc[]
include::Interaction_with_other_proposals.adoc[]
//the index must precede the bibliography
// include::index.adoc[]
// include::bibliography.adoc[]

Commit message:

Add {privspec} macro for easy reference to the Privileged Architecture specification

sspmp/header.adoc, after:

[[header]]
:description: RISC-V S-mode Physical Memory Protection (Sspmp)
:company: RISC-V.org
:revdate: 7/2025
:revnumber: 0.9.12
:revremark: This document is in development. Assume everything can change. See http://riscv.org/spec-state for details.
:url-riscv: http://riscv.org
:doctype: book
:preface-title: Preamble
:colophon:
:appendix-caption: Appendix
:imagesdir: /inputs/images
:title-logo-image: image:risc-v_logo.svg[pdfwidth=3.25in,align=center]
// Settings:
:experimental:
:reproducible:
// needs to be changed? bug discussion started
//:WaveDromEditorApp: app/wavedrom-editor.app
:imagesoutdir: /outputs/images
:bibtex-file: example.bib
:bibtex-order: alphabetical
:bibtex-style: apa
:icons: font
:lang: en
:listing-caption: Listing
:sectnums:
:toc: left
:toclevels: 4
:source-highlighter: pygments
ifdef::backend-pdf[]
:source-highlighter: coderay
endif::[]
:data-uri:
:hide-uri-scheme:
:stem: latexmath
:footnote:
:xrefstyle: short

// Handy macro. Reference it in the text via {privspec}.
:privspec: "RISC-V Privileged Architecture"

= RISC-V S-mode Physical Memory Protection (SPMP)
Editor - Dong Du, Bicheng Yang, RISC-V SPMP Task Group

// Preamble
[WARNING]
.This document is in the link:http://riscv.org/spec-state[Development state]
====
Assume everything can change. This draft specification will change before
being accepted as standard, so implementations made to this draft
specification will likely not conform to the future standard.
====

[preface]
== Copyright and license information
This specification is licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License (CC-BY 4.0). The full
license text is available at
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

Copyright 2023 by RISC-V International.

[preface]
include::contributors.adoc[]

include::intro.adoc[]
include::spmp_spec.adoc[]
include::Resource_Sharing.adoc[]
include::Summary_of_Hardware_Changes.adoc[]
include::guidelines.adoc[]
// include::Interaction_with_hypervisor_extension.adoc[]
include::Interaction_with_other_proposals.adoc[]
//the index must precede the bibliography
// include::index.adoc[]
// include::bibliography.adoc[]
