sspmp/Resource_Sharing.adoc, before:

[[PMP_Resource_Sharing]]
== Extension of Resource Sharing

Given that PMP and SPMP have similar layout of address/config registers and the same address matching logic.
Reusing registers and comparators between PMP and SPMP may be benefitial (in some cases) to save hardware resources.
This section introduces the resource sharing extension that can support dynamic reallocation of hardware resource between PMP and SPMP.
Notably, **this extension is not mandatory** and a specific implementation can still statically implement the numbers of regions in PMP and SPMP.

Implementations can consider PMP/SPMP entries as a resource pool (called PMP_Resource).
Specifically, each PMP_Resource consists of an address CSR, a configuration CSR, and associated micro-architecture state.
A new M-mode CSR called `mpmpdeleg` is introduced to control the sharing of PMP_Resource between PMP and SPMP.

In the following description, we will refer to the PMP/SPMP from the hardware perspective as `PMP_Resource`, and the PMP/SPMP from the software perspective as `entry`.


The 16-bit CSR shown in <<mpmpdeleg_format>> has one `pmpnum` field:

. `pmpnum` is 7-bit, allowing a value of 0--64 to specify the number of PMP entries.
. Any PMP_Resource greater than or equal to the `pmpnum` is delegated to S-mode (SPMP). The lower numbered PMP_Resource are left for M-mode (PMP). Delegating higher indexed PMP_Resource to SPMP enables implementations with a single priority tree.
. M-mode could set `pmpnum>=64` (the number of implemented PMP_Resource), to reserve all resources for PMP.
. M-mode could set `pmpnum=0` to delegate all PMP_Resource to SPMP. 
. The reset value of `pmpnum` is `0b100_0000`.


[[mpmpdeleg_format]]
.mpmpdeleg CSR format.
include::images/bytefield/mpmpdeleg_format.adoc[]

**Constraints:**

. With RV32, the values of `pmpnum`, can only be a multiple of 4; with RV64, it can only be a multiple of 8. This design avoids sharing the same configuration CSR between S-mode and M-mode.
. The `pmpnum` is a WARL field. Illegal writes (e.g., values that are not multiples of 4 (RV32) or 8 (RV64)) should be ignored.
. If the SPMP entry with lowest CSR number is configured with TOR address-matching mode, zero is used for the lower bound.

**Addressing:**

Both PMP and SPMP entries will be supported contiguously.
The PMP entries begin with the lowest CSR number, while the SPMP entries begin with `mpmpdeleg.pmpnum`.
For instance, given an implementation with a total of 64 PMP Resource entries, if `mpmpdeleg.pmpnum` is set to 16 during runtime,
`PMPResource[0]` to `PMPResource[15]` would map to `PMP[0]` to `PMP[15]`.
The remaining entries, `PMPResource[16]` to `PMPResource[63]`, would be mapped as `SPMP[0]` to `SPMP[47]`.

From a software perspective, the SPMP entries start from `SPMP[0]`.
The available number of SPMP entries can be discovered by writing to and reading from the SPMP CSRs.
Illegal writes to SPMP CSRs will be ignored.


**Re-configuration:**

M-mode software can re-configure the entries for PMP and SPMP by modifying the `mpmpdeleg` CSR.
A re-configuration involving locked PMP entry will leave `mpmpdeleg` unchanged.

// [NOTE]
// ====
// Different mapping implementations have their own trade-offs.
// For example, mapping `PMPResource[32]` to `PMPResource[63]` onto `SPMP[0]` to `SPMP[31]` could necessitate additional hardware resources to translate the SPMP CSR index to the corresponding `PMPResource`.
// This might look something like the formula `pmp-resource-index = spmp-index + pmpimp`.
// Another approach is the non-zero-start mapping.
// As an example, `PMPResource[32]` to `PMPResource[63]` could be mapped to `SPMP[32]` to `SPMP[63]`, while `SPMP[0]` to `SPMP[31]` are not implemented.
// In this scenario, the SPMP CSR index mirrors that of the `PMPResources` (when it doesn't exceed 64).
// A potential drawback is that software must be able to handle scenarios where SPMP doesn't begin at the lowest CSR number.
// Nevertheless, this is generally acceptable since S-mode software commonly inspects the available SPMP entries by enumerating CSRs at boot time and utilizes the SPMP CSR accordingly based on this probe.
// Additionally, this design choice becomes even more rational when the Sscsrind extension is implemented and in use.
// PMP Resouce Sharing extension now supports both mapping methods (and others), and the software only needs to check the usable SPMP entries before using them.
// ====

Commit message:

minor refinement of resource sharing

sspmp/Resource_Sharing.adoc, after:

[[PMP_Resource_Sharing]]
== Extension of Resource Sharing

Given that PMP and SPMP have similar layout of address/config registers and the same address matching logic.
Reusing registers and comparators between PMP and SPMP may be benefitial (in some cases) to save hardware resources.
This section introduces the resource sharing extension that can support dynamic reallocation of hardware resource between PMP and SPMP.

Implementations can consider PMP/SPMP entries as a resource pool (called PMP_Resource).
Specifically, each PMP_Resource consists of an address CSR, a configuration CSR, and associated micro-architecture state.
A new M-mode CSR called `mpmpdeleg` is introduced to control the sharing of PMP_Resource between PMP and SPMP.

In the following description, we will refer to the PMP/SPMP from the hardware perspective as `PMP_Resource`, and the PMP/SPMP from the software perspective as `entry`.


The 16-bit CSR shown in <<mpmpdeleg_format>> has one `pmpnum` field:

. `pmpnum` is 7-bit, allowing a value of 0--64 to specify the number of PMP entries.
. Any PMP_Resource greater than or equal to the `pmpnum` is delegated to S-mode (SPMP). The lower numbered PMP_Resource are left for M-mode (PMP). Delegating higher indexed PMP_Resource to SPMP enables implementations with a single priority tree.
. M-mode could set `pmpnum>=64` (the number of implemented PMP_Resource), to reserve all resources for PMP.
. M-mode could set `pmpnum=0` to delegate all PMP_Resource to SPMP. 
. The reset value of `pmpnum` is `0b100_0000`.


[[mpmpdeleg_format]]
.mpmpdeleg CSR format.
include::images/bytefield/mpmpdeleg_format.adoc[]

**Constraints:**

. With RV32, the values of `pmpnum`, can only be a multiple of 4; with RV64, it can only be a multiple of 8. This design avoids sharing the same configuration CSR between S-mode and M-mode.
. The `pmpnum` is a WARL field. Illegal writes (e.g., values that are not multiples of 4 (RV32) or 8 (RV64)) should be ignored.
. If the SPMP entry with lowest CSR number is configured with TOR address-matching mode, zero is used for the lower bound.


[NOTE]
====
In case a single pool of `PMP_Resource` should be statically assigned to PMP/SPMP respectively, an implementation shall hardwire the value in `mpmpdeleg` accordingly for PMP and SPMP.
====

**Addressing:**

Both PMP and SPMP entries will be supported contiguously.
The PMP entries begin with the lowest CSR number, while the SPMP entries begin with `mpmpdeleg.pmpnum`.
For instance, given an implementation with a total of 64 PMP Resource entries, if `mpmpdeleg.pmpnum` is set to 16 during runtime,
`PMPResource[0]` to `PMPResource[15]` would map to `PMP[0]` to `PMP[15]`.
The remaining entries, `PMPResource[16]` to `PMPResource[63]`, would be mapped as `SPMP[0]` to `SPMP[47]`.

From a software perspective, the SPMP entries start from `SPMP[0]`.
The available number of SPMP entries can be discovered by writing to and reading from the SPMP CSRs.
Illegal writes to SPMP CSRs will be ignored.


**Re-configuration:**

M-mode software can re-configure the entries for PMP and SPMP by modifying the `mpmpdeleg` CSR.
A re-configuration involving locked PMP entry will leave `mpmpdeleg` unchanged.

// [NOTE]
// ====
// Different mapping implementations have their own trade-offs.
// For example, mapping `PMPResource[32]` to `PMPResource[63]` onto `SPMP[0]` to `SPMP[31]` could necessitate additional hardware resources to translate the SPMP CSR index to the corresponding `PMPResource`.
// This might look something like the formula `pmp-resource-index = spmp-index + pmpimp`.
// Another approach is the non-zero-start mapping.
// As an example, `PMPResource[32]` to `PMPResource[63]` could be mapped to `SPMP[32]` to `SPMP[63]`, while `SPMP[0]` to `SPMP[31]` are not implemented.
// In this scenario, the SPMP CSR index mirrors that of the `PMPResources` (when it doesn't exceed 64).
// A potential drawback is that software must be able to handle scenarios where SPMP doesn't begin at the lowest CSR number.
// Nevertheless, this is generally acceptable since S-mode software commonly inspects the available SPMP entries by enumerating CSRs at boot time and utilizes the SPMP CSR accordingly based on this probe.
// Additionally, this design choice becomes even more rational when the Sscsrind extension is implemented and in use.
// PMP Resouce Sharing extension now supports both mapping methods (and others), and the software only needs to check the usable SPMP entries before using them.
// ====
