readme.adoc, before:

= RISC-V SPMP Extension

Working draft of the proposed RISC-V SPMP extension.

= License

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC-BY-4.0).
See the link:LICENSE[LICENSE] file for details.

= Contributors

Contributors to this specification are contained in the link:contributors.adoc[contributors] file.

For instructions on how to contribute please see the link:CONTRIBUTING.md[CONTRIBUTING] file.

= Dependencies

This project is built using AsciiDoctor (Ruby). The repository has been setup to build the PDF on
checkin using GitHub actions.  Workflow dependencies are located in the `dependencies` directory.

For more information on AsciiDoctor, specification guidelines, or building locally, see the
https://github.com/riscv/docs-dev-guide[RISC-V Documentation Developer Guide].

= Cloning the project

This project uses https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Tools-Submodules[GitHub Submodules]
to include the https://github.com/riscv/docs-resources[RISC-V docs-resources project]
to achieve a common look and feel.

When cloning this repository for the first time, you must either use
`git clone --recurse-submodules` or execute `git submodule init` and `git submodule update` after the clone to populate the docs-resources directory.  Failure to clone the submodule, will result
in the PDF build fail with an error message like the following:

    $ make
    asciidoctor-pdf \
    -a toc \
    -a compress \
    -a pdf-style=docs-resources/themes/riscv-pdf.yml \
    -a pdf-fontsdir=docs-resources/fonts \
    --failure-level=ERROR \
    -o profiles.pdf profiles.adoc
    asciidoctor: ERROR: could not locate or load the built-in pdf theme `docs-resources/themes/riscv-pdf.yml'; reverting to default theme
    No such file or directory - notoserif-regular-subset.ttf not found in docs-resources/fonts
      Use --trace for backtrace
    make: *** [Makefile:7: profiles.pdf] Error 1

= Building the document

The final specification form of PDF can be generated using the `make` command.

Commit message:

spec: add compiled pdf file and update readme
Signed-off-by: Dong Du <Dd_nirvana@sjtu.edu.cn>

readme.adoc, after:

= RISC-V SPMP Extension

Working draft of the proposed RISC-V SPMP extension.
You can check the link:rv-spmp-spec.pdf[Latest RISC-V SPMP] file, or build the spec from source.

= License

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC-BY-4.0).
See the link:LICENSE[LICENSE] file for details.

= Contributors

Contributors to this specification are contained in the link:contributors.adoc[contributors] file.

For instructions on how to contribute please see the link:CONTRIBUTING.md[CONTRIBUTING] file.

= Dependencies

This project is built using AsciiDoctor (Ruby). The repository has been setup to build the PDF on
checkin using GitHub actions.  Workflow dependencies are located in the `dependencies` directory.

For more information on AsciiDoctor, specification guidelines, or building locally, see the
https://github.com/riscv/docs-dev-guide[RISC-V Documentation Developer Guide].

= Cloning the project

This project uses https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Tools-Submodules[GitHub Submodules]
to include the https://github.com/riscv/docs-resources[RISC-V docs-resources project]
to achieve a common look and feel.

When cloning this repository for the first time, you must either use
`git clone --recurse-submodules` or execute `git submodule init` and `git submodule update` after the clone to populate the docs-resources directory.  Failure to clone the submodule, will result
in the PDF build fail with an error message like the following:

    $ make
    asciidoctor-pdf \
    -a toc \
    -a compress \
    -a pdf-style=docs-resources/themes/riscv-pdf.yml \
    -a pdf-fontsdir=docs-resources/fonts \
    --failure-level=ERROR \
    -o profiles.pdf profiles.adoc
    asciidoctor: ERROR: could not locate or load the built-in pdf theme `docs-resources/themes/riscv-pdf.yml'; reverting to default theme
    No such file or directory - notoserif-regular-subset.ttf not found in docs-resources/fonts
      Use --trace for backtrace
    make: *** [Makefile:7: profiles.pdf] Error 1

= Building the document

The final specification form of PDF can be generated using the `make` command.
