spmp_spec.adoc, before:

[[S-mode_Physical_Memory_Protection]]
== S-mode Physical Memory Protection (SPMP)

An optional RISC-V S-mode Physical Memory Protection (SPMP) provides per-hart supervisor-mode control registers to allow physical memory access privileges (read, write, execute) to be specified for each physical memory region.
The SPMP is checked before the PMA checks and PMP checks, the same as paged virtual memory.

Like PMP, the granularity of SPMP access control settings are platform-specific and within a platform may vary by physical memory region, but the standard SPMP encoding should support regions as small as four bytes. 

SPMP checks will be applied to all accesses for both U mode and S mode, depending on the values in the configuration registers.
M-mode accesses are not affected and always pass SPMP permission checks.
SPMP registers can always be modified by M-mode and S-mode software. SPMP registers can grant permissions to U-mode, which has none by default, and revoke permissions from S-mode, which has all permissions allowed through PMP/ePMP by default.

=== Requirements

1) S mode should be implemented


=== Memory Protection Unit CSRs

Like PMP, SPMP entries are described by an 8-bit configuration register and one XLEN-bit address register. Some SPMP settings additionally use the address register associated with the preceding SPMP entry. The number of SPMP entries can vary by implementation, and up to 64 SPMP entries are supported in standard.

[NOTE]
====
The terms, entry and rule, are similar to ePMP.
====

The SPMP configuration registers are packed into CSRs in the same way as PMP does. For RV32, 16 CSRs, spmpcfg0-spmpcfg15, hold the configurations spmp0cfg-spmp63cfg for the 64 SPMP entries.
For RV64, even numbered CSRs (i.e., spmpcfg0, spmpcfg2, ..., spmpcfg14) hold the configurations for the 64 SPMP entries; odd numbered CSRs (e.g., spmpcfg1) are illegal.
Figure 1 and 2 demonstrate the first 16 entries of SPMP, the layout of rest entries is similar.


image::RV32_SPMP_configuration_CSR_layout.png[title="RV32 SPMP configuration CSR layout"]

image::RV64_SPMP_configuration_CSR_layout.png[title="RV64 SPMP configuration CSR layout"]

The SPMP address registers are CSRs named spmpaddr0-spmpaddr63.
Each SPMP address register encodes bits 33-2 of 34-bit physical address for RV32, as shown in Figure 4.
For RV64, each SPMP address encodes bits 55–2 of a 56-bit physical address, as shown in Figure 5.
Fewer address bits may be implemented for specific reasons, e.g., systems have a smaller physical address space.
Implemented address bits must be contiguous and have to go from lower to higher bits.

image::RV32_SPMP_address_register_format.png[title="SPMP address register format, RV32"]

image::RV64_SPMP_address_register_format.png[title="SPMP address register format, RV64"]

The layout of SPMP configuration registers is the same as PMP configuration registers, as is shown in Figure 6. The whole register is WARL.

. The S bit marks a rule as *S-mode-only* when set and *U-mode-only* when unset.
The encoding of ``spmpcfg.RW=01``, and the encoding ``spmpcfg.SRWX=1111``, now encode a Shared-Region.
The rules and encodings for permission are explained in section 2.4, which resembles the encoding of ePMP (except SPMP doesn't use locked rules).

. Bit 5 and 6 are reserved for future use.

. The A bit will be described in the following sections (2.3).

. The R/W/X bits control read, write, and instruction execution permissions.

image::SPMP_configuration_register_format.png[title="SPMP configuration register format"]

*The number of SPMP entries*: The proposal allows 64 SPMP entries, which can provide 64 isolated regions concurrently. To provide more isolation regions, the software in S-mode (usually an OS) can virtualize more isolated regions and schedule them by switching the values in SPMP entries.

*The reset state*: On system reset, the A field of spmp[i]cfg should be zero.



=== Address Matching

The A field in an SPMP entry’s configuration register encodes the address-matching mode of the associated SPMP address register.
It is the same as PMP/ePMP.

=== Encoding of Permissions


SPMP has three kinds of rules: *U-mode-only*, *S-mode-only*, and *Shared-Region* rules.
The S bit marks a rule as *S-mode-only* when set and *U-mode-only* when unset.
The encoding ``spmpcfg.RW=01`` encodes a Shared-Region and ``spmpcfg.SRWX=1000`` is reserved for future standard use.

. An _S-mode-only_ rule is *enforced* on Supervisor mode and *denied* on User mode.
+
. A _U-mode-only_ rule is *enforced* on User modes and *denied*/*enforced* on Supervisor mode depending on the value of ``sstatus.SUM`` bit:
+
* If ``sstatus.SUM`` is set, a U-mode-only rule is enforced yet without code execution permission on Supervisor mode in order to ensure SMEP.
+
* If ``sstatus.SUM`` is unset, a U-mode-only rule is denied on Supervisor mode.
+
. A _Shared-Region_ rule is enforced on both Supervisor and User modes, with restrictions depending on the ``spmpcfg.S`` and ``spmpcfg.X`` bits:
+
* If ``spmpcfg.S`` is not set the region can be used for sharing data between S-mode and U-mode so is not executable. S-mode has RW access to that region and U-mode has read-only access if ``spmpcfg.X`` is not set, or RW access if ``spmpcfg.X`` is set.
+
* If ``spmpcfg.S`` is set the region can be used for sharing code between S-mode and U-mode so is not writeable. Both S-mode and U-mode have execute access on the region and S-mode may also have read access if ``spmpcfg.X`` is set.
+
* The encoding ``spmpcfg.SRWX=1111`` can be used for sharing data between S-mode and U mode, where both modes only have read-only access to the region.


The encoding and results are shown in the table:

[cols="^1,^1,^1,^1,^3,^3,^3",stripes=even,options="header"]
|===
4+|Bits on _spmpcfg_ register 3+|Result
.2+.^|S .2+.^|R .2+.^|W .2+.^|X 2+|S Mode|U Mode
|SUM=0|SUM=1|SUM=0/1
|0|0|0|0 3+|Inaccessible region (Access Exception)
|0|0|0|1 2+|Access Exception|Execute-only region
|0|0|1|0 3+|Shared data region: Read/write on S mode, read-only on U mode
|0|0|1|1 3+|Shared data region: Read/write for both S and U mode
|0|1|0|0|Access Exception|Read-only region|Read-only region
|0|1|0|1|Access Exception|Read-only region|Read/Execute region
|0|1|1|0|Access Exception|Read/Write region|Read/Write region
|0|1|1|1|Access Exception|Read/Write region|Read/Write/Execute region
|1|0|0|0 3+|Reserved
|1|0|0|1 2+|Execute-only region|Access Exception
|1|0|1|0 3+|Shared code region: Execute only on both S and U mode
|1|0|1|1 3+|Shared code region: Execute only on U mode, read/execute on S mode
|1|1|0|0 2+|Read-only region|Access Exception
|1|1|0|1 2+|Read/Execute region|Access Exception
|1|1|1|0 2+|Read/Write region|Access Exception
|1|1|1|1 3+|Shared data region: Read only on both S and U mode
|===

**SUM bit**: We re-use the sstatus.SUM (allow Supervisor User Memory access) bit to modify the privilege with which S-mode loads and stores access physical memory. The semantics of SUM in SPMP is consistent with it in paging.


=== Priority and Matching Logic
M-mode accesses are always considered to pass SPMP checks.
If PMP/ePMP is implemented, then accesses succeed only if both PMP/ePMP and SPMP permission checks pass.


Like PMP entries, SPMP entries are also statically prioritized. The lowest-numbered SPMP entry that matches any byte of an access (indicated by an address and the accessed length) determines whether that access is allowed or fails. The matching SPMP entry must match all bytes of an access, or the access fails, irrespective of the S, R, W, and X bits.

1. If the privilege mode of the access is M, the access is allowed;
2. If the privilege mode of the access is S and no SPMP entry matches, the access is allowed;
3. If the privilege mode of the access is U and no SPMP entry matches, but at least one SPMP entry is implemented, the access fails;
4. Otherwise, the access is checked according to the permission bits in the matching SPMP entry and is allowed only if it satisfies the permission checking with the S, R, W, or X bit corresponding to the access type.

=== SPMP and Paging
The table below shows which mechanism to use. (Assume both MMU and SPMP are implemented.)

[cols="^1,^1", stripes=even, options="header"]
|===
|satp|Isolation mechanism
|satp.mode == Bare|SPMP only
|satp.mode != Bare|MMU only
|===

We do not allow both SPMP and MMU permissions active at the same time now because:
(1) It will introduce one more layer to check permission for each memory access. This issue will be more serious for guest OS which may have host SPMP and guest SPMP.
(2) MMU can provide sufficient protection.

That means, SPMP is enabled when `satp.mode==Bare` and  SPMP is implemented.


[NOTE]
====
If page-based virtual memory is not implemented, or when it is disabled, memory accesses check the SPMP settings synchronously, so no fence is needed.
====

=== Exceptions
Failed accesses generate an exception. SPMP follows the strategy that uses different exception codes for different cases, i.e., load, store/AMO, instruction faults for memory load, memory store/AMO and instruction fetch respectively.

The SPMP reuses exception codes of page fault for SPMP fault.
This is because page fault is typically delegated to S-mode, and so does SPMP, so we can benefit from reusing page fault.
S-mode software(i.e., OS) can distinguish page fault from SPMP fault by checking satp.mode (as mentioned in 2.6, SPMP and paged virtual memory will not be activated simultaneously).
The *SPMP is proposing to rename page fault to SPMP/page fault for clarity*.

Note that a single instruction may generate multiple accesses, which may not be mutually atomic. 

Table of renamed exception codes:

[cols="^1,^1,^1", stripes=even, options="header"]
|===
|Interrupt|Exception Code|Description
|0|12|Instruction SPMP/page fault
|0|13|Load SPMP/page fault
|0|15|Store/AMO SPMP/page fault
|===

[NOTE]
====
You can refer to the Table 3.6 in riscv-privileged spec.
====

*Delegation*: Unlike PMP which uses access faults for violations, SPMP uses SPMP/page faults for violations. The benefit of using SPMP/page faults is that we can delegate the violations caused by SPMP to S-mode, while the access violations caused by PMP can still be handled by machine mode.



=== Context Switching Optimization
With SPMP, each context switch requires the OS to store 64 address registers and 8 configuration registers (RV64), which is costly and unnecessary.
So the SPMP is proposing an optimization to minimize the overhead caused by context switching.

We add two CSRs called *_spmpswitch0_* and *_spmpswitch1_*, which are XLEN-bit read/write registers, formatted as shown in Figure 7.
For RV64, only *_spmpswitch0_* is used.
Each bit of this register holds on/off status of the corresponding SPMP entry respectively.
During context switch, the OS can simply store and restore spmpswitch as part of the context.
An SPMP entry is activated only when both corresponding bits in spmpswitch and A field of spmpicfg are set. (i.e., spmpswitch[i] & spmp[i]cfg.A)

image::SPMP_domain_switch_register_format.png[title="SPMP domain switch register format (RV64)"]

Commit message:

spec: refine spmp encoding table

spmp_spec.adoc, after:

[[S-mode_Physical_Memory_Protection]]
== S-mode Physical Memory Protection (SPMP)

An optional RISC-V S-mode Physical Memory Protection (SPMP) provides per-hart supervisor-mode control registers to allow physical memory access privileges (read, write, execute) to be specified for each physical memory region.
The SPMP is checked before the PMA checks and PMP checks, the same as paged virtual memory.

Like PMP, the granularity of SPMP access control settings are platform-specific and within a platform may vary by physical memory region, but the standard SPMP encoding should support regions as small as four bytes. 

SPMP checks will be applied to all accesses for both U mode and S mode, depending on the values in the configuration registers.
M-mode accesses are not affected and always pass SPMP permission checks.
SPMP registers can always be modified by M-mode and S-mode software. SPMP registers can grant permissions to U-mode, which has none by default, and revoke permissions from S-mode, which has all permissions allowed through PMP/ePMP by default.

=== Requirements

1) S mode should be implemented


=== Memory Protection Unit CSRs

Like PMP, SPMP entries are described by an 8-bit configuration register and one XLEN-bit address register. Some SPMP settings additionally use the address register associated with the preceding SPMP entry. The number of SPMP entries can vary by implementation, and up to 64 SPMP entries are supported in standard.

[NOTE]
====
The terms, entry and rule, are similar to ePMP.
====

The SPMP configuration registers are packed into CSRs in the same way as PMP does. For RV32, 16 CSRs, spmpcfg0-spmpcfg15, hold the configurations spmp0cfg-spmp63cfg for the 64 SPMP entries.
For RV64, even numbered CSRs (i.e., spmpcfg0, spmpcfg2, ..., spmpcfg14) hold the configurations for the 64 SPMP entries; odd numbered CSRs (e.g., spmpcfg1) are illegal.
Figure 1 and 2 demonstrate the first 16 entries of SPMP, the layout of rest entries is similar.


image::RV32_SPMP_configuration_CSR_layout.png[title="RV32 SPMP configuration CSR layout"]

image::RV64_SPMP_configuration_CSR_layout.png[title="RV64 SPMP configuration CSR layout"]

The SPMP address registers are CSRs named spmpaddr0-spmpaddr63.
Each SPMP address register encodes bits 33-2 of 34-bit physical address for RV32, as shown in Figure 4.
For RV64, each SPMP address encodes bits 55–2 of a 56-bit physical address, as shown in Figure 5.
Fewer address bits may be implemented for specific reasons, e.g., systems have a smaller physical address space.
Implemented address bits must be contiguous and have to go from lower to higher bits.

image::RV32_SPMP_address_register_format.png[title="SPMP address register format, RV32"]

image::RV64_SPMP_address_register_format.png[title="SPMP address register format, RV64"]

The layout of SPMP configuration registers is the same as PMP configuration registers, as is shown in Figure 6. The whole register is WARL.

. The S bit marks a rule as *S-mode-only* when set and *U-mode-only* when unset.
The encoding of ``spmpcfg.RW=01``, and the encoding ``spmpcfg.SRWX=1111``, now encode a Shared-Region.
The rules and encodings for permission are explained in section 2.4, which resembles the encoding of ePMP (except SPMP doesn't use locked rules).

. Bit 5 and 6 are reserved for future use.

. The A bit will be described in the following sections (2.3).

. The R/W/X bits control read, write, and instruction execution permissions.

image::SPMP_configuration_register_format.png[title="SPMP configuration register format"]

*The number of SPMP entries*: The proposal allows 64 SPMP entries, which can provide 64 isolated regions concurrently. To provide more isolation regions, the software in S-mode (usually an OS) can virtualize more isolated regions and schedule them by switching the values in SPMP entries.

*The reset state*: On system reset, the A field of spmp[i]cfg should be zero.



=== Address Matching

The A field in an SPMP entry’s configuration register encodes the address-matching mode of the associated SPMP address register.
It is the same as PMP/ePMP.

=== Encoding of Permissions


SPMP has three kinds of rules: *U-mode-only*, *S-mode-only*, and *Shared-Region* rules.
The S bit marks a rule as *S-mode-only* when set and *U-mode-only* when unset.
The encoding ``spmpcfg.RW=01`` encodes a Shared-Region and ``spmpcfg.SRWX=1000`` is reserved for future standard use.

. An _S-mode-only_ rule is *enforced* on Supervisor mode and *denied* on User mode.
+
. A _U-mode-only_ rule is *enforced* on User modes and *denied*/*enforced* on Supervisor mode depending on the value of ``sstatus.SUM`` bit:
+
* If ``sstatus.SUM`` is set, a U-mode-only rule is enforced yet without code execution permission on Supervisor mode in order to ensure SMEP.
+
* If ``sstatus.SUM`` is unset, a U-mode-only rule is denied on Supervisor mode.
+
. A _Shared-Region_ rule is enforced on both Supervisor and User modes, with restrictions depending on the ``spmpcfg.S`` and ``spmpcfg.X`` bits:
+
* If ``spmpcfg.S`` is not set the region can be used for sharing data between S-mode and U-mode so is not executable. S-mode has RW access to that region and U-mode has read-only access if ``spmpcfg.X`` is not set, or RW access if ``spmpcfg.X`` is set.
+
* If ``spmpcfg.S`` is set the region can be used for sharing code between S-mode and U-mode so is not writeable. Both S-mode and U-mode have execute access on the region and S-mode may also have read access if ``spmpcfg.X`` is set.
+
* The encoding ``spmpcfg.SRWX=1111`` can be used for sharing data between S-mode and U mode, where both modes only have read-only access to the region.


The encoding and results are shown in the table:

image::SPMP_Encoding_Table.png[title="SPMP Encoding Table"]

////
[cols="^1,^1,^1,^1,^1,^1,^1",stripes=even,options="header"]
|===
| 3+|S=0 3+|S=1
|spmpcfg|S-mode|S-mode|U-mode|S-mode|S-mode|U-mode
|RWX|SUM=0|SUM=1|SUM=x|SUM=0|SUM=1|SUM=x
|R - -|Deny|EnforceNoX|Enforce|Enforce|Enforce|Deny
|R - X|Deny|EnforceNoX|Enforce|Enforce|Enforce|Deny
|- - X|Deny|EnforceNoX|Enforce|Enforce|Enforce|Deny
|- - -|Deny|EnforceNoX|Enforce 3+|RSVD
|R W -|Deny|EnforceNoX|Enforce|Enforce|Enforce|Deny
|R W X|Deny|EnforceNoX|Enforce 3+|SHR RO
|- W X 3+|SHR RW 2+|SHR RX|SHR X
|- W - 2+|SHR RW|SHR RO 3+|SHR X
|===
////

**Deny**: Access not allowed.

**Enforce**: The R/W/X permissions are enforced on accesses.

**EnforceNoX**: The R/W permissions are enforced on accesses, while the X bit is forced to be zero.

**SHR**: It is shared between S/U modes with X, RX, RW, or ReadOnly privileges.

**RSVD**: It is reserved for future use.

**SUM bit**: We re-use the sstatus.SUM (allow Supervisor User Memory access) bit to modify the privilege with which S-mode loads and stores access physical memory. The semantics of SUM in SPMP is consistent with it in Sv.


=== Priority and Matching Logic
M-mode accesses are always considered to pass SPMP checks.
If PMP/ePMP is implemented, then accesses succeed only if both PMP/ePMP and SPMP permission checks pass.


Like PMP entries, SPMP entries are also statically prioritized. The lowest-numbered SPMP entry that matches any byte of an access (indicated by an address and the accessed length) determines whether that access is allowed or fails. The matching SPMP entry must match all bytes of an access, or the access fails, irrespective of the S, R, W, and X bits.

1. If the privilege mode of the access is M, the access is allowed;
2. If the privilege mode of the access is S and no SPMP entry matches, the access is allowed;
3. If the privilege mode of the access is U and no SPMP entry matches, but at least one SPMP entry is implemented, the access fails;
4. Otherwise, the access is checked according to the permission bits in the matching SPMP entry and is allowed only if it satisfies the permission checking with the S, R, W, or X bit corresponding to the access type.

=== SPMP and Paging
The table below shows which mechanism to use. (Assume both MMU and SPMP are implemented.)

[cols="^1,^1", stripes=even, options="header"]
|===
|satp|Isolation mechanism
|satp.mode == Bare|SPMP only
|satp.mode != Bare|MMU only
|===

We do not allow both SPMP and MMU permissions active at the same time now because:
(1) It will introduce one more layer to check permission for each memory access. This issue will be more serious for guest OS which may have host SPMP and guest SPMP.
(2) MMU can provide sufficient protection.

That means, SPMP is enabled when `satp.mode==Bare` and  SPMP is implemented.


[NOTE]
====
If page-based virtual memory is not implemented, or when it is disabled, memory accesses check the SPMP settings synchronously, so no fence is needed.
====

=== Exceptions
Failed accesses generate an exception. SPMP follows the strategy that uses different exception codes for different cases, i.e., load, store/AMO, instruction faults for memory load, memory store/AMO and instruction fetch respectively.

The SPMP reuses exception codes of page fault for SPMP fault.
This is because page fault is typically delegated to S-mode, and so does SPMP, so we can benefit from reusing page fault.
S-mode software(i.e., OS) can distinguish page fault from SPMP fault by checking satp.mode (as mentioned in 2.6, SPMP and paged virtual memory will not be activated simultaneously).
The *SPMP is proposing to rename page fault to SPMP/page fault for clarity*.

Note that a single instruction may generate multiple accesses, which may not be mutually atomic. 

Table of renamed exception codes:

[cols="^1,^1,^1", stripes=even, options="header"]
|===
|Interrupt|Exception Code|Description
|0|12|Instruction SPMP/page fault
|0|13|Load SPMP/page fault
|0|15|Store/AMO SPMP/page fault
|===

[NOTE]
====
You can refer to the Table 3.6 in riscv-privileged spec.
====

*Delegation*: Unlike PMP which uses access faults for violations, SPMP uses SPMP/page faults for violations. The benefit of using SPMP/page faults is that we can delegate the violations caused by SPMP to S-mode, while the access violations caused by PMP can still be handled by machine mode.



=== Context Switching Optimization
With SPMP, each context switch requires the OS to store 64 address registers and 8 configuration registers (RV64), which is costly and unnecessary.
So the SPMP is proposing an optimization to minimize the overhead caused by context switching.

We add two CSRs called *_spmpswitch0_* and *_spmpswitch1_*, which are XLEN-bit read/write registers, formatted as shown in Figure 7.
For RV64, only *_spmpswitch0_* is used.
Each bit of this register holds on/off status of the corresponding SPMP entry respectively.
During context switch, the OS can simply store and restore spmpswitch as part of the context.
An SPMP entry is activated only when both corresponding bits in spmpswitch and A field of spmpicfg are set. (i.e., spmpswitch[i] & spmp[i]cfg.A)

image::SPMP_domain_switch_register_format.png[title="SPMP domain switch register format (RV64)"]
